Derek Li
03/06/16
Summary #7

The influence of lithification on Cenozoic marine biodiversity trends by A. J. W. Hendy (2009)

Article summary
The author starts off by stating that the fossil record is usually biased because of the change in rock volume and patchiness in the preservation of soft-bodied animals. However, some paleontologists adopt an approach called alpha diversity to overcome this bias in censoring global biodiversity. They think variations in alpha diversity can be used to avoid biases when measuring global diversity. The author then brings up a problem that previous assessments of alpha diversity in Cenozoic age did not include the increase in unlithified fossiliferous sediments, leading to a loss of taxonomic information. As a result, Hendy decides to address this issue by utilizing dataset from fossil assemblages in the late Miocene-Pleistocene and comparing the diversity of mollusk-dominated and brachiopod-dominated fossils. 

The author’s approach involves 169 fossil samples with more focus on retrieving the maximum diversities. Sampling is restricted to mollusk and brachiopod-dominated shell bed and all of them have to be contained in certain matrix. Samples are then assigned to one of three lithification grades: unlithified, poorly lithified, and lithified. In addition, a data set is extracted from the Fossil Record File database in order to build a baseline. Based on the previous effort, the author compares several arrangements of the data set, with particular interest in Mollusks and brachiopods. 

In the latter half of the paper, the author provides results of the analysis. The first conclusion the author draws is that preservation in loose sediments enhances the collection of fossil material. The second one is most unlithified samples have higher richness than lithified sediments. The third one is it is more efficient to just focus on a single biofacies while sampling. Moreover, the author concludes that there is a fundamental difference in the recoverable faunal composition of lithified and unlithified samples. Hendy ends the discussion by stating that the Cenozoic increase is attributed to the increasing availability of unlithified sediments.

Things I liked about this paper
There are two things I liked about the paper. The author combines the results and discussion sections. I think it is rather helpful in helping readers to understand what each result actually leads us to. For instance, in the second paragraph of the results and discussion section, the author states that at comparable levels of sampling, most unlithified samples show higher richness than those from lithified sediments. Then the author uses actual data to support this conclusion by stating that unlithified sediments yielded on average close to 20 genera, whereas lithified sediments produced less than ten genera. Furthermore, the author provides a figure to prove this conclusion. I feel like it is a rather persuasive way to write a paper and the author makes it much easier for readers who are not familiar with this topic to better understand the author’s points. The other thing I liked about this paper is that, Hendy gives a rather thorough background introduction at the beginning of the paper. I think the information the author provides is quite helpful for readers to understanding the rest of the article. 


Things I did not like about this paper
There is one thing I did not like about this paper. The methods part seems a bit too redundant for me, especially the latter half of the methods section. The author mentions that analysis of mineralogical composition was also presented as the percentage of the genus roster belonging to categories of either dominantly calcitic or aragonitic shell mineralogy. From my point of view, this part does not seem to be tied up with the gist of this paper. As a result, I think it would be nice if the author cut off this part and dedicate more space to the conclusion section. 

Evaluations of tables and figures
I really enjoyed the overall quality of the figures and tables. They all give readers a rather explicit view of the author’s points of view. Moreover, the legends provide the most important information that the author wants to convey and also some side notes. I think those are really thoughtful. 


