Derek Li
03/13/16
Summary #8

Determinants of extinction in the fossil record by S. E. Peters and M. Foote (2002)

Article summary
The authors start off by stating that due to the amount of available sedimentary rock, sampling may causes biased perceptions of biodiversity and evolutionary rates. The principle of sequence stratigraphy is a great example. Then the authors state that they are going to predict how would extinction fossil record change if the extinction rates were consistent. They firstly evaluate the relationship between the global level of extinction and estimated number of marine sedimentary formations. They find that many extinct taxa with poor rock record tend to have deceptive final occurrences, leading to spurious high extinction rate. The authors also conduct a further test, indicating the same result. Secondly, the authors use a mathematical model to assess how much the extinction rates can be influenced by amount of available rock records. Strikingly, the result shows a match between observed and model-predicted extinction rates. One of the possible explanations is that the actual extinction event was more severe than we have expected. The other explanation is that both extinction rate and preservation of rock are affected by the same cause, such as change in sea level.

Near the end of the article, the authors talk about the methods they utilize in this paper, including using ref. 25 to collect named lithostratigraphic rock units, which are represented by formations. Besides testing for consistency between formations, the authors also test their data against estimation of global marine outcrop area, which shows a positive correlation. Furthermore, 30,379 marine genera and per capita extinction rates are used in the analysis. Regarding the extinction model, the authors state that for declining model, they fit an exponential decline through the observed rates at first, then they use the formation data to calculate the preservation rates for every genus. At last, the R was measured to get an average value of model extinction rate.

Things I liked about this article
There are two things I liked about this paper. First of all, the authors provide a lot of examples that are closely related to the concepts throughout the entire article. These examples successfully help readers get a better understanding of the article. For instance, in the very first paragraph, in order to explain why highly variable rock record may distort the timings of origination and extinction, the authors bring up that the last occurrences of taxa could shift in depositional environments due to basin in-filling, and etc. At least from my own perspective, I think it is a rather helpful example in assisting readers to understand some of the concepts that the authors mention in the article.

The other thing I liked about the article is that the authors did a great job in combining the introduction, statistical analysis and results sections. They are all perfectly integrated within each other. For example, after the authors briefly analyze the dada in Figure 1, they then make a smooth transition to the result section, in which the authors further talk about the indications of their results. I feel like it is a really great way to combine each section and present the data without causing any confusion. 

Things I did not like about this article
I did not like the methods part of this article for two reasons. One was that this part is sort of independent of the entire article and the format makes the methods hard for readers to tie them back to the body of the article. I was really confused when I was reading this part. The other thing was that the methods section is really short and hard to understand. I feel like the authors should have elaborated more on this section so that the readers can gain a better understanding of it. 

Evaluation of tables and figures
The only problem is that figure 1(a) is kind of difficult for readers to interpret, however the main information was explained rather explicitly in the context. Beside that, I think the overall quality of the figures and table is great, since they are rather self-explanatory.
