Derek Li
Summary #3
02/07/16

Niche Conservatism Above the Species Level by E. A. Hadley (2009)

Article summary:
In this article, Hadley investigates how mammalian altered their distribution in response to climate change in the past based on variation in fossil record. The author starts off by stating that future species occurrence can be predicted by using the climatic envelop around today’s species distribution. As a result, by using historic data, we can investigate whether the distribution of species has changed over time. Based on an important idea that the geographic ranges of congeneric species define the ecological niche of a genus, Hadley brings up some questions, including what extent of higher-level ecological niches has been affected by past climate change and whether major variations in species distribution can lead to changes in higher-level ecological niche space.

The author then talks about the approach that she used to investigate whether the higher-level ecological niches has change in the past 130,000 years. The author looked at the geographic ranges of mammals and how both relative and absolute size responded to major climatic changes. The author’s results indicate that the range of species-level ecological niches changes over the past 130,000 years. However, demonstrated by the relative range size, the higher-level ecological niches remained unchanged over time. One of the reasons that the higher-level niches are more resistant to climate change is that species can expand their ranges, once they become vacant. It manifests that the higher-level niches are primarily conserved by trait-based controls. As a result, the author concludes that essential ecological traits are conserved above the species level. Toward the end of the paper, Hadley discusses about the limits and indications of this paper, for instance, the author states that the results infer that the differences in the geographic ranges of species may be due to competitive interactions instead of abiotic environment. At last, the author ends her discussion by giving an overall summary of the paper. 

Things I liked about the paper
One thing I liked about this paper is that it investigates a problem I have never come into contact before. As a result, even though the process of reading this paper was a little bit unpleasant, I still enjoyed the huge amount of information that the author offers in this paper. I think it is rather instructional for readers who do not have too much background information regarding this topic. Moreover, I also enjoyed the part where the author states the limits and indications of the paper, since Hadley gives us a rather explicit and reasonable discussion here based on previous results. For instance, the discussion about how the differences in the geographic range of species may be due to the competitive interaction is mostly based on the result that the higher-level niches are primarily conserved by trait-based controls.

Thing I did not like about the paper
There are several things that I did not like about the paper. First of all, as I mentioned before, I think this paper is a little bit hard to understand in the first place, especially the part where Hadly gives readers background information regarding the topic. It took me some time to finally understand some of the concepts in the paper. Secondly, the author gives a really long introduction of the topic. It was kind of confusing for me, because I almost forgot what the gist of the paper is when I was on the second page.
Evaluations of the tables and figures
I thought the table was kind of difficult to interpret, however the main information was explained rather explicitly in results and discussion sections. Moreover, the overall quality of the figures is great, since they are rather self-explanatory. In summary, this is a rather instructional paper. It provides readers a lot of information, however it will be easier to follow if the author was more concise.

